Overview
survived because
	1. complex with few keystrokes
	2. combine existing programs in new ways
	3. automate repetitive tasks 
fundamental to using more powerful tools including HPC
prereq: saved files and know folder or directory
		not much use if: know how to manipulate files/dirs, grep & find, scripts
		
Intro to shell
computers
	1. run programs & perform calculations
	2. store data
	3. communicate with one another
	4. interact with us

interact with us: brain-computer interface, speech recognition (Alexa, Google Home)
most communication still done with hardware like mouse, keyboard, screen
operating system receives instructions from software like windows, pointers, icons
GUI is relatively new, since 1980s
early development by Doug Englebart in 1960s, Mother of All Demos on youtube

long before GUI, line printers were used, which permitted only keyboard entry and printer output
software and programming languages constrained by this
called command-line interface, or CLI, as opposed to GUI
read-evaluate-print loop
	user types a command and return
	it is executed, 
	and the result printed
	repeat until user logs off

sounds as if user directly issues commands to computer, and computer responds
in fact user sends commands to the shell, which figures out which programs to run
shell encloses the operating system and hides much of the complexity of direct interaction
most common flavor of shell is bash (Bourne Again Shell) after Stephen Bourne
default Unix shell and is most Windows Unix tools

Bash feels more like programming than using a mouse or GUI.
Commands are terse, cryptic, and result in printed output rather than something graphical.
Efficiency in number of keystrokes, ability to combine existing tools into pipelines,
and automate analysis of large quantities of data.
Makes us more productive and our work more reproducible.
Easiest way to work with remote computers
increased use of cloud/cluster means that shell programming is essential in the sciences

part of OS responsible for managing files and folders is called file system
organizes data into files, which hold information, and places these into
directories, which can also hold other directories
